So it looks like we found a new gas
giant at Alpha Centuri.
Alpha Centuri is of course the nearest
star to the sun and the lead star of the
constellation Centurus
down there in the southern hemisphere
just to the left of the southern cross.
You can see Alpha marked with the arrow
and it is in fact a triple star system.
We have a comparison here between the
sun and the three stars of Alpha
Centuri. Alpha Centuri A called Riel
Centurus.
Alpha Centuri B has a name Tyman and
Alpha Centuri C is called Proxima
Centuri because it's in fact the nearest
star to the sun by a very small margin
compared to the other two at just over
4.2 two light years away from us.
And I've got this uh image here which
shows a lovely picture of that part of
the sky with a couple of insets. So
again, we have the southern cross just
left of the center, the band of the
Milky Way and then the stars Alpha
Centuri and Beta Century, which is not
Alpha Centuri B. It's a separate star
system entirely. And the first inset is
a zoom in showing Alpha Centuri A and B
split, which you can do with a fairly
modest telescope. They're four arc
seconds apart. So that's achievable. And
Proxima Centuri orbits around the AB
pair. So far away in fact, that it's
quite distinctly different. I think it's
about 8° of sky away across the Milky
Way there against the starfield where
you find Proxima. Now, that's a very
faint star because it's a little tiny
red dwarf. Too hard for most people to
observe, especially against the myriad
other stars in that vicinity.
Now the question has always been in
these double star systems like Alpha
Century A and B can you orbit planets?
Is that possible? Can you have stable
orbits? Well,
the answer is yes. In one of two ways.
either you orbit one of the stars,
doesn't matter which one, close enough
that you are in a zone where its gravity
is dominant and the other star is far
enough away that it doesn't uh affect
things. That's called being inside the
hill sphere of the star and you can
mathematically work that out. And we
have this diagram for the alpha century
AB system. Here you can see A at the top
left and B at the bottom right. And
there are about 11 astronomical units
the Earth's sun distance apart from each
other when they get closest although the
orbit of A and B around each other is
somewhat elliptical. Um so this is the
close approach. They can be further away
than that. And at that distance you find
that there is a ring inside which you
can form stable orbits around each of
the two stars. It's a little bit smaller
for Alpha Centuri B than it is for Alpha
Centuri A because B is a little bit less
massive as a star and so has weaker
gravity.
And of course, the other option for
orbits in a binary system is really what
Proxima Centuri, the little red dwarf,
is doing that is 13,000 astronomical
units away, far enough away from the AB
pair that essentially it treats them as
a single gravitating
central mass and the distance between
them is so small. It's less than one
part in a thousand after all. So, uh, it
can just ignore the fact that there's a
double layer at all. And you can you can
do that as a planet. You can orbit
around a pair at a long distance.
Now, back in 2021,
[Music]
there was a possible detection of
Alpha Centuri candidate planet C1, a
super Neptune. I don't know why they
call them super Neptune because super
Neptunes are like Saturn really and
perhaps uh I suppose we might start
thinking rings as soon as someone says
Saturn. So perhaps that's why they
choose to call them super Neptunes.
And this was detected in this uh image
here of
an orbit of 1.1 astronomical units
taking just about a year, 360 days. And
the estimates of the mass were somewhat
vague. Somewhere between 9 and 35 times
the mass of the Earth and somewhere in
terms of size between 3.3 and 7 times
the Earth's radius. Um so in fact you
know Neptune itself would be 16 times
the mass of the earth. So right in the
middle of that range. Um so a super
Neptune is going to be at the upper end
of that scale perhaps.
So that was four years ago in 2021.
And at the time when I first talked
about this, I said that James Webb Space
Telescope was due to search for planets
around Alpha Centuri in July and August
of 2023.
And we have some results.
So this is the best image from the
Hubble Space Telescope very nicely
showing the A and B stars separated out.
When James Web turns its cameras and it
particular its mirror mid infrared
instrument to the A and B stars, you get
the image up at the right there. Um the
characteristics six-fold symmetry tells
us this is James Webb. and bars pointing
away from the pair of stars there, but
you really can't see anything. The stars
are so nearby and so bright as a result
that they're rather overwhelming the
camera. So, we've got to do something
about that direct starlight.
And fortunately, you can use along with
the mirror instrument a device called a
coronagraph, a metal blocking plate that
you can swing into the light path and
try to block out the light that's coming
from the stars and leave just the light
that is bypassing the disc. And so we
have this image at the top here. uh
you've got a little square box around
Alpha Centuri A and the rather brighter
Alpha Centuri B far enough away that
we're not worrying about it. It's what's
going on inside that little tiny square
box and the star marking the position of
Alpha Century A that we're interested
in. But all over the image, you can see
the bright spots and ridges that are
caused by stray light. It's not possible
to block out all of the light. Some of
it will defract round your blocking
instrument, your coronagraph, and gets
into the camera in an interference
pattern.
And you can see that interference
pattern around the position of the
central star where the little orange
star has been placed in the image. And
so that makes it very very difficult to
spot planets, especially when they're
close to the star.
But
it's possible to clean the image up um
pass it through filtration in computers
and in particular subtract out the
expected interference
pattern.
Now that's given us the picture at the
top right there. The orange star and the
black disc is the coronagraph marking
the position where alpha century A has
been blotted out. And you can see
there's still some stray light coming
around, but there is a fairly bright
object labeled S1 with the ring around
it. That is believed to be this probable
planet.
Actually, there a couple of other blobs
in there that might be interested in,
but maybe they're just noise. We don't
know. So, James Webb may well have found
this object, but we seem to have lost it
again. Having been detected last year in
2024, no new sightings have been
obtained. The uh telescope was able to
use a little bit of discretionary time
to follow up the observations in
February of this year, 2025, and again
in April. And in both cases, no
detection was made in the data.
So maybe the planet is orbiting around
the star and has moved out from it's the
position far enough away from the star
for us to detect and is perhaps either
in the line of sight or behind the star
or so close to it that we're not able to
determine its position. Now that's
interesting.
That means it's moved.
And from the results of the
non-appearance of it, a number of
simulations have been done
to suggest what the orbit might be. And
it looks like the best fit is an
elliptical orbit around about one to two
astronomical units.
And with the brightness of the image
that was detected suggesting a size
similar to Saturn, we're talking about a
gas giant planet orbiting in the
habitable zone. You can calculate the
zone around the star where the
temperature is going to be such that
liquid water can exist
and that's between uh 0 and 100° C.
hotter towards the center, cooler
towards the edge. And for Alpha Centuri
A, that zone runs from around about 0.8
AU to 2.4.
So an orbit going from 1 to 2 AU puts it
in the habitable zone. That's obviously
quite a big swing in habitable
temperature because it would go from
being quite warm to being quite cold. So
the seasons would be dominated by the
orbital motion rather than just as it is
with Earth in our near circular orbit.
Our seasons are dominated by the tilt of
the axis giving one hemisphere winter
and one summer. Here the entire planet
would move out into the winter
configuration and then back into summer
as it went round its orbit.
And you can see just for good measure
Alpha Centuri B on the right there with
a rather smaller habitable zone. It's a
cooler star than uh our sun. So you have
to get a bit closer into it. But
nevertheless, it's unlikely that a gas
giant planet the size of Saturn orbiting
in an orbit like this is going to be
habitable directly and have its own life
on it. But gas giant planets, certainly
the ones we know in our solar system,
have families of moons. And those moons
would be at a similar sort of
temperature. And so there's an artist's
impression here of a large planet-sized
moon. In fact, a couple of them orbiting
around a gas giant planet. And maybe
that is something that we should be
looking out for. Certainly true because
uh in the case of uh quite a number of
sunlike stars that were found to have
transiting planets in the Kepler
discoveries of 20 years or so ago. We
have found quite a number of these
exoplanets to have exomoons by transit
timing. timing the movement of the
planet in front of the star and
detecting whether or not it's arriving
early or late based on whether it's got
a moon of significant size leading it or
following it.
So, we really need to follow these
observations up and one possibility is
that James Web will continue trying to
place further observations. But we're
also due to launch in 2027 out to
accompany it out at L2, the Lrangee
Point beyond the Earth, a million miles
out in space. The Nancy Grace Roman
Space Telescope with its 2.4 4 meter
mirror and it's got a 300 megapixel
camera which uh with that optical system
it's going to give it a 100fold
increase in the field of view compared
to Hubble but more significantly from
our point of view it's also going to be
fitted with a coronagraph so that it can
target exoplanets and it'll begin to do
uh do work in a couple of years time if
all goes Well, and so maybe we will be
able to turn this to point to uh the
Alpha Century system and find more
planets and find out more about the ones
we know about.
So, thanks very much for listening and I
hope you've enjoyed that short video
about the possible discovery of a gas
giant planet in the star system right
next door to our own.